---
layout: post
title: "Party PI: Solves the issue of different music tastes!"
date: 2019-03-22
---

At the company I work at we sometimes throw a party to celebrate the day!
Unfortunately we have very different tastes of music. So solve that I setup a Raspberry PI so
everyone can vote for their music. What could go wrong? :P

First step was to setup Mopidy on a Raspberry PI with pulseaudio or just alsa. As there are already
a lot of tutorials available I'll skip this one.

Next install [Mopidy-Party](https://pypi.org/project/Mopidy-Party/) and other extensions for music
sources. You'll probably want the [Mopidy-Spotify](https://github.com/mopidy/mopidy-spotify) to have
a variety of music available. It does not make sense to just include your music! Even if you'd like
to do that ;).

This will add a new entry to the landing page on http://raspberrypi:8080/
There is no limit on how many tracks you can add to the queue. There is only a minimum amount of
votes defined to skip the current track.
Even with the missing limit for adding it works pretty well!


This is a sample from my mopidy config:
```conf
[audio]
#mixer = software
#mixer_volume =
#output = autoaudiosink
#buffer_time =

[mpd]
#enabled = true
hostname = ::
#port = 80
password =

[http]
enabled = true
hostname = ::
port = 8080
#static_dir =
#zeroconf = Mopidy HTTP server on $hostname
#allowed_origins =
#csrf_protection = true

[spotify]
username = <username>
password = <password>
client_id = <client_id> 
client_secret = <client_secret> 

[party]
enabled = true
votes_to_skip = 6

[moped]
enabled = false

[musicbox_webclient]
enabled = false
```

Make sure to disable any non-party web clients. Else your party guests will find the access to it.
Especially when they are other engineers! To have this admin power myself I use `mpd` to control the
playback. Not many people would run nmap to find this open port.

With about 15 guests a `votes_to_skip` count of 6 worked well. Make sure nobody uses multiple phones!
Please note that in order to change that you need to restart Mopidy and will loose your current
playlist.

Happy party!

